As I remember, Adam,
it was upon this fashionbequeathed me by will
but poor 1,000 crowns
and, as thou sayest,
charged my brother on hisblessing
to breed me well:
and there begins mysadness.
My brother Jaques he keepsat school,
and report speaks goldenlyof his profit.
For my part, he keeps merustically at home,
or, to speak moreproperly, stays me here athome unkept;
for call you that keepingfor a gentleman of mybirth
that differs not from thestalling of an ox?
Oh, his horses are bredbetter,
for besides that they arefair with their feeding,
they are taught theirmanage
and to that end ridersdearly hired.
But I his brother gainnothing under him butgrowth,
for the which his animalson his dunghills
are as much bound to himas I.
Besides this nothing thathe so plentifully givesme,
the something that naturegave me
his countenance seems totake from me.
He lets me feed with hishinds, bars me the placeof a brother,
and as much as in him lies
mines my gentility with myeducation.
This is it, Adam, thatgrieves me;
and the spirit of myfather, which I think iswithin me,
begins to mutiny againstthis servitude.
I will no longer endureit,
though yet, I know no wiseremedy how to avoid it.
Yonder comes my master,your brother.
Now, sir, what make youhere?
Nothing.
I am not taught to makeanything.
What mar you then, sir?
Marry, sir, I am helpingyou to mar that which Godmade,
a poor unworthy brother ofyours with idleness.
Marry, sir, be betteremployed, and be naughtawhile.
Shall I keep your hogs andeat husks with them?
What prodigal portion haveI spent
that I should come to suchpenury?
Know you where your are,sir?
O, sir, very well: here inyour orchard.
Know you before whom, sir?
Aye, better than him I ambefore knows me.
I know that you are myeldest brother;
and in the gentlecondition of blood, youshould so know me.
The courtesy of nationsallows you my better,
in that you are thefirst-born;
but the same traditiontakes not away my blood
were there 20 brothersbetwixt us.
I have as much of myfather in me as you,
albeit, I confess, yourcoming before me is nearerto his reverence.
What, boy.
Come, come, elder brother,you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me,villain?
I am no villain.
I am the youngest son ofSir Rowland de Boys.
He was my father,
and he is thrice a villain
that says such a fatherbegot villains.
Wert thou not my brother,I would not take this handfrom thy throat
till this other hand hadpulled out thy tongue forsaying so.
Thou hast railed onthyself.
Sweet masters, be patient.
For your father'sremembrance, be at accord.
Let me go, I say!
I shall not till I please.
You shall hear me.
Ah!
My father charged you inhis will to give me goodeducation.
You have trained me like apeasant,
obscuring and hiding fromme all gentleman-likequalities.
The spirit of my fathergrows strong in me,
and I will no longerendure it!
Therefore,
allow me such exercises asmay become a gentleman,
or give me the poorallottery my father leftme by testament.
With that, I will go buymy fortunes.
And what wilt thou do?
Beg when that is spent?
Well, sir, get you in.
I will not long betroubled with you.
You shall have some partof your will.
I pray you, leave me.
I shall no further offendyou than becomes me for mygood.
Get you with him, you olddog.
Is "old dog" my reward?
Most true, I have lost myteeth in your service.
God be with my old master.
He would not have spokesuch a word.
Is it e'en so?
Begin you to grow upon me?
I will physic yourrankness,
and yet give no thousandcrowns neither.
Holla, Dennis!
Calls your worship?
Was not Charles, theduke's wrestler, here tospeak with me?
So please you,
he is here at the door andimportunes access to you.
Call him in.
'Twill be a good way, fortomorrow the wrestling is.
Good morrow to yourworship.
Good Monsieur Charles,
what's the new news at thenew court?
There's no news at thecourt, sir, but the oldnews.
That is, the old duke hasbeen banished
by his younger brother thenew duke,
and three or four lovinglords
have put themselves intovoluntary exile with him,
whose lands and revenuesenrich the new duke.
Therefore, he gives themgood leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind,the duke's daughter,
be banished with herfather?
Oh, no, for the duke'sdaughter, her cousin, soloves her,
being ever from theircradles bred together,
that she would havefollowed her exile or havedied to stay behind her.
She is at the court
and no less beloved of heruncle than his owndaughter,
and never two ladies lovedas they do.
Where will the old dukelive?
They say he is already atthe forest of Arden
and a many merry men withhim,
and there they live likethe old Robin Hood ofEngland.
They say many younggentlemen flock to himevery day
and fleet the timecarelessly as they did inthe golden world.
What, you wrestle tomorrowbefore the new duke?
Marry, do I, sir,
and I came to acquaint youwith a matter.
I am given, sir, secretly,to understand
that your younger brotherOrlando
hath a disposition to comein disguised against me totry a fall.
Tomorrow, sir, I wrestlefor my credit;
and he that escapes mewithout some broken limb
shall acquit him well.
Your brother is but youngand tender;
and, for your love, Iwould be loath to foil him
which I must for my ownhonour if he come in.
Therefore, out of my loveto you, I came hither toacquaint you withal
that either you might stayhim from his intendment
or brook such disgracewell as he shall run into,
in that it is a thing ofhis own search
and altogether againstmy will.
Charles, I thank thee forthy love to me,
which thou shalt find Iwill most kindly requite.
I had myself notice of mybrother's purpose herein
and have by underhandmeans laboured to dissuadehim from it,
but he is resolute.
And thou wert best lookto't,
for if thou dost him anyslight disgrace,
or if he do not mightilygrace himself on thee,
he will practise againstthee by poison,
entrap thee by sometreacherous device
and never leave thee tillhe hath ta'en thy life
by some indirect means orother;
for, I assure thee--
and almost with tears Ispeak it--
there is not one so youngand so villainous
this day living.
I am heartily glad I camehither to you.
If he come tomorrow, I'llgive him his payment.
And so, God keep yourworship.
Farewell, good Charles.
Now will I stir thisgamester:
I hope I shall see an endof him,
for my soul, yet I knownot why, hates nothingmore than he.
Yet he's gentle, neverschooled yet learned,
full of noble device, allsorts enchantinglybeloved--
indeed, so much in theheart of the world
and especially of mine ownpeople, who best know him,
that I am altogethermisprized.
But it shall not be solong.
This wrestler shall clearall.
Nothing remains but that Ikindle the boy hither,
which now I'll go about.
Oh.
I pray thee, Rosalind,sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear Celia, I show moremirth than I am mistressof,
and would you yet I weremerrier?
Unless you could teach meto forget a banishedfather,
you must not learn me toremember any extraordinarypleasure.
Herein, I see thou lovestme not with the fullweight that I love thee.
If my uncle, thy banishedfather,
had banished thy uncle,the duke my father,
so thou hadst still beenwith me,
I could have taught mylove to take thy fatherfor mine.
So wouldst thou if thetruth of thy love to me
were so righteouslytempered as mine is tothee.
Well, I will forget thecondition of my estate
to rejoice in yours.
You know my father hath nochild but I,
nor none is like to have;
and truly, when he dies,thou shalt be his heir,
for what he hath takenaway from thy fatherperforce,
I will render thee againin affection.
By mine honour, I will,
and when I break thatoath, let me turn monster.
Therefore, my sweet Rose,
my dear Rose...
be merry.
From henceforth, I will,coz,
and devise sports.
Ah.
Let me see.
What think you of fallingin love?
Marry, I prithee, do, tomake sport withal,
ah, but love no man ingood earnest
nor no further in sportneither
than with the safety of apure blush
thou mayst in honour comeoff again.
What shall be our sport,then?
Let us sit and mock
the good housewife Fortunefrom her wheel
that her gifts henceforthmay be bestowed equally.
I would we could do so,
for her benefits aremightily misplaced,
and the bountiful blindwoman doth most mistake
in her gifts to women.
'Tis true,
for those she makes fair,she scarce makes honest,
and those she makeshonest, she makes veryill-favoredly.
Nay, now thou goest fromFortune's office toNature's.
Fortune reigns in thegifts of the world,
not in the lineaments ofNature.
No?
How now, wit!
Whither wander you?
Mistress, you must comeaway to your father.
Were you made themessenger?
No, by mine honour, but Iwas bid to come for you.
Where learned you thatoath, fool?
Of a certain knight
that swore by his honourthey were good pancakes
and swore by his honourthe mustard was naught.
Now I'll stand to it.
The pancakes were naught,and the mustard was good,
and yet was not the knightforsworn.
How prove you that
in the great heap of yourknowledge?
Aye, marry, now unmuzzleyour wisdom.
Stand you both forth now.
Oh.
Stroke your chins,
and swear by your beardsthat I am a knave.
By our beards, if we hadthem, thou art.
By my knavery, if I hadit, then I were;
but if you swear by thatthat is not,
you are not forsworn.
No more was this knightswearing by his honour,
for he never had any;
or if he had, he had swornit away
before ever he saw thosepancakes or that mustard.
Prithee, who is't thatthou meanest?
One that old Frederick,your father, loves.
My father's love is enoughto honour him.
Enough; speak no more ofhim.
You'll be whipped fortaxation, one of thesedays.
The more pity that foolsmay not speak wisely
what wise men dofoolishly.
By my troth, thou sayesttrue,
for since the little witthat fools have wassilenced,
the little foolery thatwise men have
makes a great show.
Ah, here comes Monsieur LeBeau.
With his mouth full ofnews.
Which he will put on us aspigeons feed their young.
Then shall we benews-crammed.
All the better.
We shall be the moremarketable.
Bon jour, Monsieur LeBeau.
What is the news?
Fair princess, you havelost much good sport.
Sport!
Of what color?
What color, madam?
How shall I answer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the Destiniesdecree.
Well said.
That was laid on with atrowel.
You amaze me, ladies.
I would have told you ofgood wrestling
which you have lost thesight of.
Yet tell us the manner ofthe wrestling.
I will tell you thebeginning,
and if it please yourladyships, you may see theend;
for the best is yet to do.
Well, the beginning, thatis dead and buried.
There comes an old man andhis three sons.
I could match thisbeginning with an oldtale.
Three proper young men ofexcellent growth andpresence.
The eldest of the threewrestled with Charles, theduke's wrestler,
which Charles, in amoment,
threw him and broke threeof his ribs
that there is little hopeof life in him.
So he served the secondand so the third.
Yonder they lie,
the poor old man, theirfather, making suchpitiful dole over them
that all the beholderstake his part withweeping.
Alas.
But what is the sport,monsieur, that the ladieshave lost?
Why, this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiserevery day.
It is the first time thatever I heard
breaking of ribs was sportfor ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else
longs to see this brokenmusic in his sides?
Is there yet another dotesupon rib breaking?
Shall we see thiswrestling, cousin?
They are ready to performit.
Come on.
Since the youth will notbe entreated,
his own peril on hisforwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, madam.
Alas, he is too young,
and yet he lookssuccessfully.
How now, daughter andcousin.
Are you crept hither tosee the wrestling?
Aye, my liege, so pleaseyou give us leave.
You will take littledelight in it,
I can tell you.
There is such odds in theman.
In pity of thechallenger's youth, Iwould fain dissuade him,
but he will not beentreated.
Speak to him, ladies.
See if you can move him.
Call him hither, goodMonsieur Le Beau.
Do so; I'll not be by.
Monsieur the challenger,the princess calls foryou.
I attend them with allrespect and duty.
Young sir, have youchallenged Charles thewrestler?
No, fair princess.
He is the generalchallenger.
I come but in as others do
to try with him thestrength of my youth.
Young gentleman,
your spirits are too boldfor your years.
You have seen cruel proofof this man's strength.
If you saw yourself withyour eyes
or knew yourself with yourjudgment,
the fear of this adventure
would counsel you to amore equal enterprise.
We pray you, for your ownsake,
to embrace your own safetyand give over thisattempt.
Do, young sir.
Your reputation shall nottherefore be misprized.
We shall make it our suitto the duke
that the wrestling may notgo forward.
I beseech you, punish menot with your hardthoughts,
wherein I confess me muchguilty
to deny so fair andexcellent ladies anything,
but let your fair eyes andgentle wishes
go with me to my trial,
wherein if I be foiled,
there is but one shamedthat was never gracious;
if killed, but one deadthat was willing to be so.
I shall do my friends nowrong, for I have none tolament me;
the world no injury, forin it I have nothing;
only in the world I fillup a place
which may be bettersupplied when I have madeit empty.
The little strength Ihave, I would it were withyou.
And mine to eke out hers.
Fare you well.
Pray heaven I be deceivedin you.
Your heart's desires bewith you.
Come, where is this younggallant
that is so desirous to liewith his mother earth?
Ready, sir,
but his will hath in it amore modest working.
You shall try but onefall.
No, I warrant, your grace,
you shall not entreat himto a second
that have so mightilypersuaded him from afirst.
You mean to mock me after.
You should not have mockedme before.
But come your ways.
Now Hercules be thy speed,young man!
I would I were invisible,
to catch the strong fellowby the leg.
Hold.
O excellent, young man!
If I had a thunderbolt inmine eye,
I can tell who shoulddown.
No more. No more.
Yes, I beseech your grace.
I am not yet wellbreathed.
How dost thou, Charles?
He cannot speak, my lord.
Bear him away.
What is thy name, youngman?
Orlando, my liege,
the youngest son of SirRowland de Boys.
I would thou hadst beenson to some man else.
The world esteem'd thyfather honourable,
but I did find him stillmine enemy.
Thou shouldst have betterpleased me with this deed
hadst thou descended fromanother house,
now fare thee well.
Thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told meof another father.
Were I my father, coz,would I do this?
I am more proud to be SirRowland's son,
his youngest son,
and would not change thatcalling to be adopted heirto Frederick.
My father loved SirRowland as his soul,
and all the world was ofmy father's mind.
Had I before known thisyoung man his son,
I should have given himtears unto entreaties
ere he should thus haveventured.
Gentle cousin,
let us go thank him andencourage him.
My father's rough andenvious disposition
sticks me at heart.
Sir...
you have well deserved.
If you do keep yourpromises in love
but justly as you haveexceeded all promise,
your mistress shall behappy.
Gentleman, wear this forme...
one out of suits withfortune,
that would give more butthat her hand lacks means.
Shall we go, coz?
Aye.
Fare you well, fairgentleman.
Can I not say I thank you?
My better parts are allthrown down,
and that which here standsup is but a quintain,
a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back.
My pride fell with myfortunes.
I'll ask him what hewould.
Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestledwell
and overthrown more thanyour enemies.
Will you go, coz?
Have with you.
Fare you well.
What passion hangs theseweights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yetshe urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou artoverthrown,
or Charles or somethingweaker masters thee.
Good sir...
I do in friendship counselyou to leave this place.
Albeit you have deservedhigh commendation,
true applause, and love,
yet such is now the duke'scondition
that he misconstrues allthat you have done.
The duke is humorous.
What he is indeed moresuits you to conceive thanI to speak of.
I thank you, sir, and prayyou, tell me this:
which of the two wasdaughter of the duke
that here was at thewrestling?
Neither his daughter if wejudge by manners,
and yet indeed, thesmaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter tothe banish'd duke
and here detain'd by herusurping uncle to keep hisdaughter company,
whose loves are dearerthan the natural bond ofsisters;
but I can tell you that oflate
this duke hath ta'endispleasure 'gainst hisgentle niece
grounded upon no otherargument
but that the people praiseher for her virtues
and pity her for her goodfather's sake;
and on my life,
his malice 'gainst thelady will suddenly breakforth.
Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a betterworld than this,
I shall desire more loveand knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden toyou; fare you well.
Thus must I from the smokeinto the smother,
from tyrant duke unto atyrant brother,
but heavenly Rosalind--
Why, cousin!
Why, Rosalind!
Cupid have mercy, not aword?
Not one to throw at a dog.
Perth, no, thy words aretoo precious
to be cast away upon curs.
Throw some of them at me.
Come, lame me withreasons.
Then there were twocousins laid up
when the one should belamed with reasons
and the other mad withoutany.
But is all this for thyfather?
No, some of it is for mychild's father.
Ah.
O, how full of briers isthis working-day world!
They are but burs, cousin,
thrown upon thee inholiday foolery.
If we walk not in thetrodden paths,
our very petticoats willcatch them.
I could throw them off mycoat.
These burs are in myheart.
Ahem-- hem them away.
I would try,
if I could cry "hem" andhave him.
Come, come, wrestle withthy affections.
O, they take the part of abetter wrestler thanmyself.
O, a good wish upon you,
and you shall try in timein despite of a fall;
but turning these jestsout of service,
let us talk in goodearnest.
Is it possible on sucha sudden
that you should fall intoso strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland'syoungest son?
The duke my father lovedhis father dearly.
But does it thereforeensue that you should lovehis son dearly?
By this kind of chase, Ishould hate him,
for my father hated hisfather dearly.
Yet, I hate not Orlando.
No, faith, hate him not,for my sake.
Why should I not?
Does he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that.
Do you love him because Ido.
Mistress,
dispatch you with yoursafest haste,
and get you from ourcourt.
Me, uncle?
You, cousin.
Within these 10 days,
if that thou be'st found
so near our public courtas 20 miles,
thou diest for it.
I do beseech your grace,
let me the knowledge of myfaultbear with me.
If with myself I holdintelligence
or have acquaintance ofmine own desires,
if that I do not dream orbe not frantic--
as I do trust I am not--
then, dear uncle, never somuch as in a thoughtunborn
did I offend yourhighness.
Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation didconsist in words,
they are as innocent asgrace itself.
Let it suffice thee that Itrust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannotmake me a traitor.
Tell me whereon thelikelihood depends.
Thou art thy father'sdaughter;there's enough.
So was I when yourhighness took his dukedom.
So was I when yourhighness banish'd him.
Treason is not inherited,my lord;
or if we did derive itfrom our friends,
what's that to me?
My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege,
mistake me not so much tothink my poverty istreacherous.
Dear sovereign, hear mespeak.
Aye, Celia; we stay'd herfor your sake,
else had she with herfather ranged along.
I did not then entreat tohave her stay.
It was your pleasure andyour own remorse.
I was too young that timeto value her,
but now I know her.
If she be a traitor, why,then so am I,
for still, we slepttogether, rose in aninstant,
learn'd, play'd, eattogether;
and wheresoever we went,like Juno's swans,
still we went coupled andinseparable.
She is too subtle forthee;
and her smoothness, hervery silence,
and her patience speak tothe people;
and they pity her.
Thou art a fool.
She robs thee of thy name,
and thou wilt show morebright and seem morevirtuous
when she is gone.
Open not thy lips!
Firm and irrevocable is mydoom which I have pass'dupon her.
She is banish'd.
Pronounce that sentencethen on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of hercompany.
You are a fool.
You, niece, provideyourself.
If you outstay the time,
upon mine honour and inthe greatness of my word,
you die.
O my poor Rosalind...
whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers?
I will give thee mine.
Oh, I charge thee,
be thou not more grievedthan I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful.
Know'st thou not,
the duke hath banish'd me,his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not?
Rosalind lacks then thelove which teaches thee
that thou and I am one.
Therefore, devise with mehow we may fly,
whither to go and what tobear with us;
and do not seek to takeyour charge upon you,
to bear your griefsyourself and leave me out,
for by this heaven,now atour sorrows pale,
say what thou canst; I'llgo along with thee.
Why, whither shall we go?
To seek my uncle in theforest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will itbe to us,
maids as we are, to travelforth so far?
Beauty provoketh thievessooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poorand mean attire
and with a kind of umbersmirch my face;
the like will you.
So shall we pass along andnever stir assailants.
Would it not be better,
because that I am morethan common tall,
that I should suit me allpoints like a man?
A gallant curtle-axe uponmy thigh,
a boar spear in my hand;
and in my heart lie there
what hidden woman's fearthere will.
We'll have a swashing anda martial outside
as many other mannishcowards have
that do outface it withtheir semblances.
What shall I call theewhen thou art a man?
I'll have no worse a namethan Jove's own page,
and look you therefore,call me Ganymede,
but what will you becall'd?
Something that hath areference to my state.
No longer Celia, butAliena.
Oh, shh.
But, cousin,
what if we assay'd tosteal the clownish fool
out of your father'scourt?
Would he not be a comfortto our travels?
He'll go o'er the wideworld with me.
Leave me alone to woo him.
Let's away and get ourjewels and our wealthtogether,
devise the fittest timeand safest way to hide usfrom pursuit
that will be made after myflight.
Now go we in content
to liberty and not tobanishment.
Now, my co-mates andbrothers in exile,
hath not old custom madethis life more sweet
than that of painted pomp?
Are not these woods morefree from peril
than the envious court?
Here feel we but thepenalty of Adam,
the seasons' difference,
as the icy fang andchurlish chiding of thewinter's wind,
which, when it bites andblows upon my body,
even till I shrink withcold,
I smile and say, "This isno flattery.
"These are counsellors
that feelingly persuade mewhat I am."
Sweet are the uses ofadversity,
which, like the toad, uglyand venomous,
wears yet a precious jewelin his head,
and this our life exemptfrom public haunt
finds tongues in trees,
books in the runningbrooks,
sermons in stones,
and good in every thing.
I would not change it.
Happy is your Grace
that can translate thestubbornness of fortune
into so quiet and so sweeta style.
Come, shall we go and killus venison?
And yet it irks me thepoor dappled fools,
being native burghers ofthis desert city,
should in their ownconfines with the forkedheads
have their round haunchesgored.
Indeed, my lord,
the melancholy Jaquesgrieves at that,
and in that kind
swears you do more usurp
than doth your brotherthat hath banish'd you.
Today, my Lord of Amiensand myself
did steal behind him as helay along
under an oak whose antiqueroot peeps out
upon the brook that brawlsalong this wood,
to the which place a poorsequester'd stag
that from the hunter's aimhad ta'en a hurt
did come to languish,
and indeed, my lord,
the wretched animal heavedforth such groans
that their discharge didstretch his leathern coatalmost to bursting,
and the big round tears
coursed one another downhis innocent nose
in piteous chase;
and thus, the hairy fool
much marked of themelancholy Jaques,
stood on the extremestverge of the swift brook,
augmenting it with tears.
But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize thisspectacle?
O, yes, into a thousandsimiles:
first, for his weepinginto the needless stream,
"Poor deer," quoth he,
"thou makest a testamentas worldlings do,
giving thy sum of more tothat which had too much";
then, being there alone,
left and abandon'd of hisvelvet friends,
"'Tis right," quoth he,
"thus misery doth part theflux of company"
anon a careless herd fullof the pasture,
jumps along by him andnever stays to greet him;
"Aye," quoth Jaques,"Sweep on, you fat andgreasy citizens;
"'tis just the fashion.
"Wherefore do you look
upon that poor and brokenbankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively,
he pierceth through thebody of the country, city,court,
yea, and of this, ourlife,
swearing that we are mereusurpers, tyrants,
and what's worse,
to fright the animals andto kill them up
in their assign'd andnative dwelling place.
And did you leave him inthis contemplation?
We did, my lord,
weeping and commentingupon the sobbing deer.
Show me the place.
I love to cope him inthese sullen fits,
for then he's full ofmatter.
Can it be possible that noman saw them?
It cannot be.
Some villains of my court
are of consent andsufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any thatdid see her.
The ladies, her attendantsof her chamber, saw herabed,
and in the morning early,
they found the beduntreasured of theirmistress.
My lord, the roynishclown,
at whom so oft your gracewas wont to laugh,
is also missing.
Hisperia, the princess'gentlewoman,
confesses that shesecretly o'erheard
your daughter and hercousin
much commend the parts andgraces of the wrestler
that did but lately foilthe sinewy Charles;
and she believes, whereverthey are gone,
that youth is surely intheir company.
Send to his brother.
Fetch that gallant hither.
I'll make him find him.
Do this expediently!
And let not search andinquisition
quail to bring again thesefoolish runaways.
Who's there?
What? My young master?
O, my gentle master,
your praise is come tooswiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, tosome kind of men
their graces serve thembut as enemies?
No more do yours.
Your virtues, gentlemaster,
are sanctified and holytraitors to you.
O, what a world is this
when what is comelyenvenoms him that bearsit?
Why, what's the matter?
O unhappy youth, come notwithin these doors.
Within this roof, theenemy of all your graceslives.
Your brother--no, nobrother-- yet the son--yetnot the son--
I will not call him son ofhim I was about to callhis father--
hath heard your praises,
and this night,
he means to burn thelodging where you use tolie
and you within it.
If he fail in that,
he hath other means to cutyou off.
I overheard him and hispractises.
This is no place.
This house is but abutchery.
Abhor it; fear it; do notenter it.
Why, whither, Adam,wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither so youcome not here.
What, wouldst thou have mego and beg my food?
Or with a base andboisterous sword
enforce a thievish livingon the common road?
Oh, but do not so.
I have 500 crowns,
the thrifty hire I savedunder your father,
which I did store to be myfoster nurse
when service should in myold limbs lie lame
and unregarded age incorners thrown.
Take that,
and he that doth theravens feed,
yea, providently catersfor the sparrow,
be comfort to my age.
Here is the gold.
All this I give you.
Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet Iam strong and lusty.
I'll do the service of ayounger man
in all your business andnecessities.
O good old man,
how well in thee appears
the constant service ofthe antique world,
when service sweat forduty, not for meed!
But, poor old man,
thou prunest a rotten treethat cannot so much as ablossom
yield in lieu of all thypains and husbandry,
but come thy ways.
We'll go along together.
Master, go on,
and I will follow thee tothe last gasp
with truth and loyalty.
From 17 years till nowalmost fourscore herelived I
but now live here no more.
At 17 years, many theirfortunes seek,
but at fourscore, it istoo late a week.
Yet fortune cannotrecompense me better
than to die well and notmy master's debtor.
O Jupiter, how weary aremy spirits.
I care not for my spiritsif my legs were not weary.
I could find it in myheart to disgrace my man'sapparel
and cry like a woman,
but I must comfort theweaker vessel
as doublet and hose
ought to show itself morecourageous to petticoat.
Therefore courage, goodAliena!
Pray you, bear with me.
I cannot go no further.
For my part,
I'd rather bear with youthan bear you,
yet I should bear no crossif I did bear you,
for I think you have nomoney in your purse.
Well...
this is the forest ofArden.
Aye, now am I in Arden,themore fool I.
When I was at home, I wasin a better place,
but travellers must becontent.
Aye, be so, goodTouchstone.
Look you, who comes here--
a young man and an old insolemn talk.
That is the way to makeher scorn you still.
O Corin, that thou knew'sthow I do love her.
I partly guess, for I haveloved ere now.
No, Corin, being old, thoucanst not guess,
though in thy youth
thou wast as true a lover
as ever sigh'd upon amidnight pillow.
But if your love were everlike to mine--
as sure I think did neverman love so--
how many actions mostridiculous
hast thou been drawn to bythy fantasy?
Into a thousand that Ihave forgotten.
O, thou didst then neverlove so heartily.
If thou remember'st notthe slightest folly
that ever love did makethee run into,
thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat asI do now,
wearying thy hearer in thymistress' praise,
thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not brokefrom company abruptly
as my passion now makesme,
thou hast not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!
Alas, poor shepherd.
Searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventurefound mine own.
And I mine.
I remember, when I was inlove,
I broke my sword upon astone and bid him takethat
for coming a-night to JaneSmile;
and I remember the kissingof her batlet
and the cow's dugs
that her pretty chopp'dhands had milked;
and I remember the wooingof a peascod instead ofher,
from whom I took two codsand, giving her themagain,
said with weeping tears,"Wear these for my sake."
Ah, we that are truelovers run into strangecapers;
but as all is mortal innature,
so is all nature in lovemortal in folly.
Thou speakest wiser thanthou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be wareof mine own wit
till I break my shinsagainst it.
Oh, Jove, Jove,
this shepherd's passion ismuch after my own fashion.
And mine,
but it grows somethingstale with me.
I pray you,
one of you question yondman
if he for gold will giveus any food.
I faint almost to death.
Holla, you clown!
Peace, fool.
He's not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
Your betters, sir.
Else are they verywretched.
Peace, I say.
Good even to you, friend.
And to you, gentle sir,
and to you all.
I prithee, shepherd,
if that love or gold
could in this desert placebuy entertainment,
bring us where we may restourselves and feed.
Here's a maid with travelmuch oppress'd
and almost faints forsuccor.
Fair sir,
I pity her and wish forher sake more than formine own
mine fortunes were moreable to relieve her,
but I am shepherd toanother man
and do not shear thefleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlishdisposition
and little reaks to findthe way to heaven
by doing deeds ofhospitality.
Besides, his cote, hisflocks, and bounds of feed
are now on sale,
and at our sheepcote now,
by reason of his absence,
there is nothing that youwill feed on;
but what is, come see;
and in my voice, mostwelcome shall you be.
What is he shall buy theflock and pasture?
That young swain that yousaw here but erewhile,
that little cares forbuying any thing.
I pray thee, if it standwith honesty,
buy thou the cottage,pasture, and the flock,
and thou shalt have to payfor it of us.
And we will mend thywages.
I like this place
and willingly could wastemy time in it.
Assuredly, the thing is tobe sold.
Go with me.
If you like upon reportthe soil, the profit,
and this way of life,
I will your very faithfulfeeder be
and buy it with your goldright suddenly.
Under the greenwood tree
who loves to lie with me
and turn his merry note
unto the sweet bird'sthroat.
Come hither, come hither,come hither.
Here shall he see no enemy
but winter and roughweather.
More, more, I prithee,more.
It will make youmelancholy, MonsieurJaques.
I thank it.
More, I prithee, more.
I can suck melancholy outof a song
as a weasel sucks eggs.
More, I prithee, more.
My voice is ragged.
I know I cannot pleaseyou.
I do not desire you toplease me;
I do desire you to sing.
Come, more; anotherstanzo.
Call you 'em stanzos?
What you will, MonsieurJaques.
Nay, I care not for theirnames.
They owe me nothing.
Will you sing?
More at your request thanto please myself.
Well then, if ever I thankany man,
I'll thank you.
Come, sing,
and you that will not,holdyour tongues.
Well, I'll end the song.
Sirs, cover the while.
The duke will drink underthis tree.
He hath been all this dayto look you.
And I have been all thisday to avoid him.
He is too disputable formy company.
I think of as many mattersas he,
but I give heaven thanksand make no boast of them.
Come, warble, come.
Who doth ambition shun
and loves to live i' thesun,
seeking the food he eats
and pleased with what hegets?
Come hither, come hither,come hither.
Here shall he see no enemy
but winter and roughweather.
I'll give you a verse
to this note that I madeyesterday
in despite of myinvention.
And I'll sing it.
Thus it goes:
If it do come to pass
that any man turn ass,
leaving his wealth andease,
a stubborn will toplease--
ducdame, ducdame,ducdame--
there shall he see grossfools as he,
and if he will, come tome.
What's that "ducdame"?
'Tis a Greek invocation tocall fools into a circle.
Oh, I'll go sleep if Ican.
If I cannot,
I'll rail against all thefirst-born of Egypt.
If it do come to pass
that any man turn ass,
leaving his wealth andease,
a stubborn will toplease--
ducdame, ducdame,ducdame--
here shall he see grossfools as he,
and if he will, come tome.
Dear master, I can go nofurther.
O, I die for food.
Here lie I down andmeasure out my grave.
Farewell, kind master.
How now, Adam.
No greater heart in thee?
Live a little; comfort alittle; cheer thyself alittle.
If this uncouth forestyield any thing savage,
I will either be food forit or bring it for food tothee.
For my sake, becomfortable.
Hold death awhile at thearm's end.
I will here be with theepresently,
and if I bring thee notsomething to eat,
I will give thee leave todie.
But if thou diest before Icome, thou art a mocker ofmy labour.
Well said.
Thou lookest cheerly,
and I will be with theequickly.
Yet thou liest in thebleak air.
Come, I will bear thee tosome shelter,
and thou shalt not die forlack of a dinner
if there live any thing inthis desert.
Cheerly, good Adam.
I think he be transform'dinto a beast,
for I can no where findhim like a man.
My lord, he is but evennow gone hence.
Here was he merry, hearingof a song.
If he, compact of jars,grows musical,
we shall have shortlydiscord in the spheres.
How now, monsieur.
What a life is this,
that your poor friendsmust woo your company?
What?
You look merrily.
A fool, a fool.
I met a fool in theforest,
a motley fool.
Oh, a miserable world.
As I do live by food,
I met a fool who laid himdown and bask'd him inthe sun
and rail'd on Lady Fortunein good terms,
in good set terms,
and yet a motley fool.
"Good morrow, fool," quothI.
"No, sir," quoth he.
"Call me not fool tillheaven hath sent mefortune,"
and then he drew a dialfrom his poke,
and, looking on it withlackluster eye,
says very wisely, "It isten o'clock.
Thus we may see," quothhe, "how the world wags.
"'Tis but an hour agosince it was nine,
"and after one hour more'twill be eleven,
"and so from hour to hour,we ripe and ripe,
"and then from hour tohour, we rot and rot,
and thereby hangs a tale."
But when I did hear themotley fool
thus moral on the time,
my lungs began to crowlike chanticleer
that fools should be sodeep-contemplative,
and I did laugh sansintermission
an hour by his dial.
O noble fool.
A worthy fool.
Motley's the only wear.
What fool is this?
A worthy fool, one thathath been a courtier,
and says if ladies be butyoung and fair,
they have the gift toknow it.
And in his brain,
which is as dry as theremainder biscuit
after a voyage,
he hath strange placescramm'd with observation
the which he vents inmangled forms.
O that I were a fool.
I am ambitious for amotley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
It is my only suit,
I must have libertywithal, as large a charteras the wind,
to blow on whom I please,
for so fools have.
Invest me in my motley.
Give me leave to speak mymind,
and I will, through andthrough,
cleanse the foul body ofthe infected world
if they will patientlyreceive my medicine.
Fie on thee.
I can tell thee what thouwouldst do.
What, for a counter, wouldI do but good?
Most mischievous foul sinin chiding sin,
for thou thyself hast beena libertine
as sensual as the brutishsting itself,
and all the embossed soresand headed evils
which thou with licence offree foot hast caught
wouldst thou disgorge intothe general world.
Why, who cries out onpride
that can therein tax anyprivate party?
Doth it not flow as hugelyas the sea
till that the wearer'svery means do ebb?
What woman in the city doI name
when that I say the citywoman bears the cost ofprinces
on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and saythat I mean her
when such a one as shesuch is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basestfunction
that says his bravery isnot of my cost
thinking that I mean him
but therein suits hisfolly to the mettle of myspeech?
There then;
how then?
What then?
Let me see wherein mytongue hath wrong'd him.
If it do him right, thenhe hath wrong'd himself.
If he be free,
why then my taxing, like awild goose, flies,
unclaim'd of any man.
Forbear, and eat no more!
Why, I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not tillnecessity be served.
Of what kind should thiscock come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd,man, by thy distress
or else a rude despiser ofgood manners
that in civility thouseem'st so empty?
You touch'd my vein atfirst.
The thorny point of baredistress
hath ta'en from me theshow of smooth civility.
Yet, am I inland bred andknow some nurture.
But forbear, I say.
He dies that touches anyof this fruit
till I and my affairs areanswered.
And you will not beanswered with reason, Imust die.
What wouldst thou have?
Thy gentleness shall force
more than your force moveus to gentleness.
I almost die for food, andlet me have it!
Sit down and feed, andwelcome to our table.
Speak you so gently?
Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all thingshad been savage here
and therefore put I on
the countenance of sterncommandment.
But whate'er you are thatin this desert inaccessible
under the shade ofmelancholy boughs
lose and neglect thecreeping hours of time,
if ever you have look'd onbetter days,
if ever been where bellshave knoll'd to church,
if ever sat at any goodman's feast,
if ever from your eyelidswiped a tear
and know what 'tis to pityand be pitied,
let gentleness my strongenforcement be.
In the which hope I blushand hide my sword.
True is it that we haveseen better days,
Ho, ho, ho, ho.
Therefore, sit you down ingentleness
and take upon command whathelp we have
that to your wanting maybe minister'd.
Then but forbear your fooda little while
whiles, like a doe, I goto find my fawn and giveit food.
There is an old poor man
who after me hath many aweary step limp'd in purelove.
Till he be first sufficed,
oppress'd with two weakevils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out,
and we will nothing wastetill you return.
I thank ye,
and be blessed for yourgood comfort.
Thou seest we are not allalone unhappy.
This wide and universaltheater presents morewoeful pageants
than the scene wherein weplay in.
All the world's a stage
and all the men and womenmerely players.
They have their exits andtheir entrances,
and one man in his timeplays many parts,
his acts being seven ages:
at first the infant,
mewling and puking in thenurse's arms;
and then the whiningschoolboy
with his satchel andshining morning face,
creeping like snailunwillingly to school;
and then the lover,sighing like furnace,
with a woeful ballad madeto his mistress' eyebrow;
then a soldier,
full of strange oaths andbearded like the pard,
jealous in honor, suddenand quick in quarrel,
seeking the bubblereputation even in thecannon's mouth;
and then the justice,
in fair round belly withgood capon lined,
with eyes severe and beardof formal cut,
full of wise saws andmodern instances,
and so he plays his part.
The sixth age shifts
into the lean andslipper'd pantaloon,
with spectacles on noseand pouch on side,
his youthful hose,well-saved,
the world too wide for hisshrunk shank,
and his big, manly voice
turning again towardchildish treble,
pipes and whistles in hissound.
Last scene of all
that ends this strange,eventful history,
is second childishness
and mere oblivion,
sans teeth,
sans eyes,
sans taste,
sans everything.
Set down your venerableburden.
And let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need.
I scarce can speak tothank you for myself.
Welcome; fall to.
I will not trouble you asyet
to question you about yourfortunes.
Give us some music,
and, good cousin, sing.
Blow, blow, thou winterwind.
Thou art not so unkind
as man's ingratitude.
Thy tooth is not so keen
because thou art not seen,
although thy breath berude.
Heigh-ho.
Sing, heigh-ho
unto the green holly.
Most friendship isfeigning.
Most loving, mere folly.
Then, heigh-ho, the holly,
this life is most jolly.
Freeze, freeze, thoubitter sky,
that dost not bite so nigh
as benefits forgot.
Though thou the waterswarp,
thy sting is not so sharp
as friend remember'd not.
Heigh-ho.
Sing, heigh-ho
unto the green holly.
Most friendship isfeigning.
Most loving, mere folly.
Then, heigh-ho, the holly,
this life is most jolly.
If that you were the goodSir Rowland's son
as you have whisper'dfaithfully you were,
and as mine eyes doth hiseffigies witness
most truly limn'd andliving in your face,
be truly welcome hither.
I am the duke that lovedyour father.
Good old man,
thou art right welcome asthy master is.
Not see him since?
Sir, sir, that cannot be!
But were I not the betterpart made mercy,
I should not seek
an absent argument of myrevenge, thou peasant.
So look to it!
Find out thy brotherwheresoe'er he is!
Seek him with candle!
Bring him dead or livingwithin this twelvemonth,
or turn thou no more
to seek a living in ourterritories.
Thy lands and all things
that thou dost call thineworth seizure
do we seize into our hands
till thou canst quit theeby thy brother's mouth
of what we think againstthee.
O that your highness knewmy heart in this.
I never loved my brotherin my life.
More villain thou.
Well, push him out ofdoors!
And let my officers ofsuch a nature
make an extent upon hishouse and lands.
Do this expediently, andturn him going!
Hang there, my verse, in witnessof my love:
And thou, thrice-crowned queenof night, survey
with thy chaste eye from thypale sphere above
thy huntress' name that my fulllife doth sway.
O Rosalind,
these trees shall be my books,
and in their barks, my thoughtsI'll character
that every eye which in thisforest looks
shall see thy virtue witness'deverywhere.
Run, run, Orlando.
Carve on every tree
the fair, the chaste, andunexpressive she.
Uh.
And how like you this shepherd'slife,
Master Touchstone?
Truly, shepherd, in respect ofitself,
it is a good life,
but in respect that it is ashepherd's life,
it is naught.
In respect that it is solitary,I like it very well,
but in respect that it isprivate,
it is a very vile life.
Now, in respect it is in thefields,
it pleaseth me well;
but in respect it is not in thecourt, it is tedious.
As is it a spare life, look you,it fits my humor well;
but as there is no more plentyin it,
it goes much against my stomach.
Hast any philosophy in thee,shepherd?
No more but that I know the moreone sickens,
the worse at ease he is
and that he that wants money,means, and content
is without three good friends;
the property of rain is to wetand fire to burn;
that good pasture makes fatsheep
and that a great cause of thenight is lack of the sun;
that he that hath learned no witby nature nor art
may complain of good breeding orcomes of a very dull kindred.
Such a one is a naturalphilosopher.
Wast ever in court, shepherd?
No, truly.
Then thou art damned.
Nay, I hope.
Truly, thou art damned like anill-roasted egg,
all on one side.
For not being at court?
Oh, your reason?
Why, if thou never wast atcourt,
thou never sawest good manners;
if thou never sawest goodmanners, thy manners must bewicked;
and wickedness is sin, and sinis damnation.
Thou art in a parlous state,shepherd.
Not a whit, Touchstone:
those that are good manners atthe court
are as ridiculous in the country
as the behavior of the countryis most mockable at the court.
You told me that you salute notat the court,
but you kiss your hands.
That courtesy would be uncleanlyif courtiers were shepherds.
Instance, briefly; come,instance.
Why, we are still handling ourewes,
and their fells, you know, aregreasy.
Why, do not your courtier'shands sweat?
And is not the grease of amutton
as wholesome as the sweat of aman?
Shallow, shallow.
A better instance, I say; come.
Besides, our hands are hard.
Your lips will feel them thesooner.
Shallow again.
A more sounder instance, come.
And they are often tarred overwith the surgery of our sheep:
and would you have us kiss tar?
The courtier's hands areperfumed with civet.
Most shallow man,
thou worm's meat in respect of agood piece of flesh indeed.
Learn of the wise, and perpend.
Civet is of a baser birth thantar,
the very uncleanly flux of acat.
Mend the instance, shepherd.
You have too courtly a wit forme.
I'll rest.
Wilt thou rest damned?
God help thee, shallow man.
God make incision in thee.
Thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true laborer.
I earn that I eat,
get that I wear,
owe no man hate,
envy no man's happiness,
glad of other men's good,
content with my harm,
and the greatest of my pride
is to see my ewes graze and mylambs suck.
That is another simple sin inyou,
to bring the ewes and the ramstogether
and to offer to get your livingby the copulation of cattle.
If thou beest not damned forthis,
the devil himself will have noshepherds.
I cannot see else how thoushouldst 'scape.
"From the east to western Ind,
"no jewel is like Rosalind.
"Her worth, being mounted on thewi--
"wind,
"through all the world bearsRosalind.
"All the pictures fairest lined
"are but black to Rosalind.
"Let no face be kept in mind
but the fair of Rosalind."
I'll rhyme you so eight yearstogether,
dinners and suppers andsleeping-hours excepted.
This is the right butter-women'srank to market.
Out, fool.
For a taste:
If a hart do lack a hind,
let him seek out Rosalind.
If the cat will after kind,
so be sure will Rosalind.
Winter garments must be lined.
so must slender Rosalind.
They that reap must sheaf andbind;
then to cart with Rosalind.
Sweetest nut hath sourest rind.
Such a nut is Rosalind.
He that sweetest rose will find
must find love's prick andRosalind.
This is the very false gallop ofverses.
Why do you infect yourself withthem?
Peace, you dull fool.
I found them on a tree.
Truly, the tree yields badfruit.
I'll graff it with you,
and then I shall graff it with amedlar.
and then, it will be theearliest fruit of the country;
for you'll be rotten ere you behalf ripe,
and that's the right virtue ofthe medlar.
Ooh, you have said,but whetherwisely or no,
let the forest judge.
Peace, here comes my sister,reading.
Let's stand aside.
"Why should this a desert be?
"For it is unpeopled?
"No.
"Tongues I'll hang on every tree
that shall civil sayings show."
Hmm.
"But upon the fairest boughs
"or at every sentence end
"will I Rosalinda write,
"teaching all that read to know
"the quintessence of everysprite
"heaven would in little show.
"Therefore, Heaven Naturecharged
"that one body should be fill'd
"with all graces wide-enlarged.
"Nature presently distill'dHelen's cheek but not her heart,
"Cleopatra's majesty,
"Atalanta's better part,
"sad Lucretia's modesty.
"Thus Rosalind of many parts
"by heavenly synod was devised
"of many faces, eyes, and hearts
"to have the touches dearestprized.
"Heaven would that she thesegifts should have
and I to live and die herslave."
O most gentle pulpiter!
What tedious homily of love
have you wearied yourparishioners withal
and never cried, "Have patience,good people."
How now.
Back, friends.
Shepherd, go off a little.
Go with him, sirrah.
Come, shepherd, let us make anhonorable retreat,
though not with bag and baggage,
yet with scrip and scrippage.
Didst thou hear these verses?
O, yes, I heard them all andmore too,
for some of them had in themmore feet than the verses wouldbear.
But didst thou hear withoutwondering
how thy name should be hangedand carved upon these trees?
I was seven of the nine days outof the wonder
before you came,
for look you here what I foundon a palm tree.
I was never so be-rhymed sincePythagoras' time
that I was an Irish rat that Ican hardly remember.
Trow you who hath done this?
Is it a man?
Mm-hmm.
And a chain, that you once wore,about his neck.
Change you color?
I prithee, who?
O Lord, Lord.
It is a hard matter for friendsto meet,
but mountains may be removedwith earthquakes
and so encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
Is it possible?
Nay, I prithee now with mostpetitionary vehemence,
tell me who it is.
O wonderful, wonderful, and mostwonderful.
Wonderful, and yet againwonderful,
and after that, out of allhooping.
Good my complexion, dost thouthink,
though I am caparisoned like aman,
I have a doublet and hose in mydisposition?
One inch of delay more is aSouth sea of discovery.
I prithee, tell me who is itquickly, and speak apace.
I prithee, take the cork out ofthy mouth
that I may drink thy tidings.
So you may put a man in yourbelly.
Is he of God's making?
What manner of man?
Is his head worth a hat or hischin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why, God will send him more ifthe man will be thankful.
Let me stay the growth of hisbeard
if you delay me not theknowledge of his chin.
No.
It is young Orlando
that tripped up the wrestler'sheels
and your heart both in aninstant.
Nay, but the devil take mocking.
Speak, sad brow and true maid.
I' faith, coz, 'tis he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Oh.
Alas the day!
What shall I do with my doubletand hose?
Oh.
What did he when thou sawesthim?
What said he?
How looked he?
Wherein went he?
What makes he here?
Did he ask for me?
Where remains he?
How parted he with thee?
And when shalt thou see himagain?
Answer me in one word.
You must borrow me Gargantua'smouth first.
'Tis a word too great
for any mouth of this age'ssize.
Oh, but--but doth he know that Iam in this forest?
And in man's apparel?
Looks he as freshly as he didthe day he wrestled?
It's as easy to count atomies
as to resolve the propositionsof a lover,
but take a taste of my findinghim,
and relish it with goodobservance.
I found him under a tree, like adropped acorn.
It may well be called Jove'stree
when it drops forth such fruit.
Give me audience, good madam.
Proceed.
There lay he, stretched alonglike a wounded knight.
Oh, though it be pity to seesuch a sight,
yet it well becomes the ground.
Cry holla to thy tongue, Iprithee.
It curvets unseasonably.
He was furnished like a hunter.
O, ominous.
He comes to kill my heart.
I would sing my song without aburden.
Thou bringest me out of tune.
Do you not know I am a woman?
When I think, I must speak.
Sweet, say on.
You bring me out.
Soft.
Comes he not here?
'Tis he.
Slink by, and note him.
Oh!
I thank you for your company,
but, good faith, I had as liefhave been myself alone.
And so had I, but yet, forfashion sake,
I thank you too for yoursociety.
God by you.
Let's meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be betterstrangers.
I pray you,
mar no more trees
with writing love songs in theirbarks.
I pray you, mar no more of myverses
with reading them ill-favoredly.
Rosalind is your love's name?
Yes, just.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasingyou
when she was christened.
What stature is she of?
Just as high as my heart.
You are full of pretty answers.
Have you not been acquaintedwith goldsmiths' wives
and conned them out of rings?
Not so; but I answer you rightpainted cloth
from whence you have studiedyour questions.
You have a nimble wit.
I think 'twas made of Atalanta'sheels.
Will you sit down with me?
And we two will rail against ourmistress the world
and all our misery.
I will chide no breather in theworld except myself,
against whom I know most faults.
The worst fault you have is tobe in love.
'Tis a fault I will not changefor your best virtue.
I am weary of you.
By my troth, I was seeking for afool when I found you.
He is drowned in the brook.
Look but in, and you shall seehim.
There I shall see mine ownfigure.
Which I take to be either a foolor a cipher.
I'll tarry no longer with you.
Farewell, good Signior Love.
I am glad of your departure.
Adieu, good Monsieur Melancholy.
I'll speak to him like a saucylackey
and under that habit play theknave with him.
Do you hear, forester?
Very well.
What would you?
I pray you, what is't o'clock?
You should ask me what time o'day.
There's no clock in the forest.
Then there is no true lover inthe forest,
else sighing every minute andgroaning every hour
would detect the lazy foot ofTime
as well as a clock.
And why not the swift foot ofTime?
Had not that been as proper?
By no means, sir.
Time travels in divers paceswith divers persons.
I'll tell you who Time ambleswithal,
who Time trots withal, who Timegallops withal,
and who he stands still withal.
I prithee, who doth he trotwithal?
Marry, he trots hard with ayoung maid
between the contract of hermarriage
and the--the--and the day thatit is solemnized,
for if the interim be but ase'nnight,
Time's pace is so hard it seemsthe length of seven year.
Who ambles Time withal?
With a priest that lacks Latin
and a rich man that hath not thegout,
for the one sleeps easilybecause he cannot study;
the other lives merrily becausehe feels no pain,
the one lacking the burden oflean and wasteful learning,
the other feeling no burden ofheavy tedious penury.
These, Time ambles withal.
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a thief to the gallows,
for though he go as soft as footcan fall,
he thinks himself too soonthere.
Who stays it still withal?
With lawyers in the vacation,
for they sleep between term andterm
and then they perceive not howTime moves.
Where dwell you, pretty youth?
With this shepherdess,
my sister,
here in the skirts of the forest
like fringe upon a petticoat.
Are you native of this place?
As the cony you see dwell whereshe is kindled.
Your accent is something finer
than you could purchase in soremoved a dwelling.
I have been told so of many,
and indeed, an old religiousuncle of mine
taught me to speak,
who was in his youth an inlandman,
one that knew courtship toowell,
for there he fell in love,
and I have heard him read manylectures against it,
and indeed, I thank God I am nota woman,
to be touched with so many giddyoffences
as he hath generally taxed theirwhole sex withal.
Can you remember any of theprincipal evils
that he lay to the charge ofwomen?
There were none principal.
They were all like one anotheras half pence are,
the one fault seeming monstrous
till his fellow fault came tomatch it.
I prithee, recount some of them.
No, I will not cast away myphysic
but upon those that are sick.
There is a man haunts the forestthat abuses our young plants
with carving "R-R-Rosalind" ontheir barks,
hangs odes upon hawthorns,elegies upon brambles,
all, forsooth, deifying the nameof Rosalind.
If I could meet thatfancy-monger,
I would give him some goodcounsel,
for he hath the quotidian oflove upon him.
I am he that is so love-shaked.
I pray you, tell me your remedy.
There is none of my uncle'smarks upon you.
He taught me how to know a manin love,
in which cage of rushes I amsure you are not prisoner.
And what were his marks?
A lean cheek, which you havenot;
a blue eye and sunken, which youhave not;
an unquestionable spirit, whichyou have not;
a beard neglected, which youhave not;
but I pardon you for that,
for simply your having in beardis a younger brother's revenue.
Then your hose should beungartered,
your bonnet unbanded, yoursleeve unbuttoned,
your shoe untied,
everything about you
demonstrating a carelessdesolation;
but you are no such man.
You are rather point-device inyour accoutrements
as loving yourself
than seeming the lover of anyother.
Fair youth, I would I could makethee believe,
I love.
Me, believe it?
You may as soon make her thatyou love believe it,
which, I warrant, she is apterto do
than to confess that she does.
That is one of the points inwhich women
still give the lie to theirconsciences.
But in good sooth, are you hethat hangs the verses on thetrees
wherein Rosalind is so admired?
I swear to thee, youth, by thewhite hand of Rosalind,
I am that he,
that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love asyour rhymes speak?
Neither rhyme nor reason canexpress how much.
Ah, ha, ha!
Love is merely a madness and, Itell you,
deserves as well a dark houseand a whip as madmen do,
and the only reason they are notso punished and cured
is that the lunacy is soordinary
the whippers are in love too.
Yet I profess curing it bycounsel.
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes, one, and in this manner:
he was to imagine me his love,
his mistress,
and I set him every day to woome,
at which time would I, being buta moonish youth,
grieve, be effeminate,changeable, longing and liking,
proud, fantastical, full oftears, full of smiles,
for every passion something andfor no passion truly anything
as boys and women are for themost part
cattle of this color;
now like him, now loathe him;
then entertain him, thenforswear him;
now weep for him, then spit athim
that I drave my suitor from hismad humor of love
to a living humor of madness,
which was to forswear the fullstream of the world
and live in a nook merelymonastic.
And thus did I cure him,
and so will I take it on me
to wash your liver as clean as asound sheep's heart,
that there shall not be one spotof love in it.
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you if you wouldbut call me Rosalind
and come to my cote every dayand woo me.
Now, by the faith of my love, Iwill.
Tell me where it is.
Go with me to it, and I willshow it to you,
and by the way,
you shall tell me where in theforest you live.
Come; will you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind.
Come, sister, will you go?
Come apace, good Audrey.
I will fetch up your goats,Audrey.
And how, Audrey?
Am I the man yet?
Doth my simple feature contentyou?
Your features! Lord warrant us!
What features?
I am here with thee and thygoats
as the most capricious poet,honest Ovid,
was among the Goths.
O knowledge ill-inhabited,
worse than Jove in a thatchedhouse.
When a man's verses can't beunderstood
or a man's good wit seconded
with the forward childunderstanding,
it strikes a man more dead
than a great reckoning in alittle room.
Truly, I would the gods had madethee poetical.
I do not know what "poetical"is.
Is it honest in deed and word?
Is it a true thing?
No, truly, for the truest poetryis the most feigning;
and lovers are given to poetry,
and what they swear in poetry
may be said as lovers they dofeign.
Do you wish then that the godshad made me poetical?
I do, truly; for thou swearestto me thou art honest.
Now, if thou wert a poet,
I might have some hope thoudidst feign.
Oh, would you not have mehonest?
No, truly--
unless thou wert hard-favored,
for honesty coupled to beauty
is to have honey a sauce tosugar.
A material fool!
Well, I am not fair,
and therefore, I pray the godsmake me honest.
Truly, and to cast away honestyupon a foul slut
were to put good meat into anunclean dish.
I am not a slut,
though I thank the gods I amfoul.
Well, praised be the gods forthy foulness.
Sluttishness may come hereafter.
But be it as it may be,
I will marry thee,
and to that end, I have beenwith Sir Oliver Martext,
the vicar of the next village,
who hath promised to meet me inthis place of the forest
and to couple us.
I would fain see this meeting.
Well, the gods give us joy!
Amen.
Oh, a man may, if he were of afearful heart,
stagger in this attempt,
for here we have no temple butthe wood,
no assembly but horn-beasts.
But what though?
Courage.
As horns are odious, they arenecessary.
No, as a walled town is moreworthier than a village,
so is the forehead of a marriedman
more honorable than the barebrow of a bachelor.
Sir Oliver Martext,
you are well met.
Will you dispatch us here underthis tree?
Or shall we go with you to yourchapel?
Yes, yes, yes.
I-I-Is there none here to givethe woman?
I will not take her on gift ofany man.
Truly, sir, she must be given,
or the marriage is not lawful.
Proceed, proceed.
I'll give her.
Good even, good MasterWhat-ye-call't.
How do you, sir?
You are very well met.
I am very glad to see you--
even a toy in hand here, sir.
Nay, pray be covered.
Will you be married, motley?
As the ox hath his bow, sir,
and the horse his curb and thefalcon her bells,
so a man hath his desires;
and as pigeons bill, so wedlockwould be nibbling.
Will you, being a man of yourbreeding,
be married under a bush like abeggar?
Get you to church, and have agood priest
that can tell you what marriageis.
This fellow will but join youtogether
as they join wainscot,
and then one of you will prove ashrunk panel
and, like green timber, warp--
warp.
I am not in the mind,
but I were better to be marriedof him than of another,
for he is not like to marry mewell,
and not being well-married,
it will be a good excuse for mehereafter
to leave my wife.
Go thou with me, and let mecounsel thee.
'Come, sweet Audrey.
We must be married, or we mustlive in bawdry.
Farewell, good Master Oliver,
not, "O sweet Oliver, O braveOliver,
leave me not behind thee,"
but, "Wind away;
"Begone, I say,
I will not to wedding withthee."
'Tis no matter.
There's ne'er a fantasticalknave of them all
shall flout me out of mycalling.
Never talk to me.
I will weep.
Do, I prithee,
and yet have the grace toconsider
that tears do not become a man.
Have I not cause to weep?
As good a cause as one coulddesire.
Therefore, weep.
His very hair is of thedissembling color.
Something browner than Judas'smarry.
His kisses are Judas's ownchildren.
I' faith, his hair is of a goodcolor.
An excellent color.
Your chestnut was ever the onlycolor.
And his kissing is as full ofsanctity
as is the touch of holy bread.
A nun of winter's sisterhoodkisses not more religiously.
There is the ice of chastity inthem.
But why did he swear he wouldcome this morning
and comes not?
Nay, certainly, there is notruth in him.
Not true in love?
When he is in, but I think he isnot in.
But you have heard him sweardownright he was.
"Was" is not "is."
Besides, the oath of a lover
is no stronger than the words ofa tapster.
They are both the confirmer offalse reckonings.
Oh, he attends here in theforest
on the duke thy father.
I met the duke yesterday and hadmuch question with him.
He asked me of what parentage Iwas.
I told him of as good as he, andso he laughed and let me go.
But what talk we of fathers
when there is such a man asOrlando?
O, there's a brave man.
He writes brave verses, speaksbrave words,
swears brave oaths, and breaksthem bravely,
quite traverse, athwart theheart of his lover.
But all's brave
that youth mounts and follyguides.
Mistress and master,
you have oft inquired
after the shepherd whocomplain'd of love
who you saw sitting by me on theturf,
praising the proud disdainfulshepherdess
that was his mistress.
Well, and what of him?
If you would see a pageant trulyplay'd
between the pale complexion oftrue love
and the red glow of scorn andproud disdain,
go hence a little, and I shallconduct you
if you will mark it.
O, come, let us remove.
The sight of lovers feedeththose in love.
Oh.
Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me.
Do not.
Phebe.
Say that you love me not,
but say not so in bitterness.
The common executioner,
whose heart the accustom'd sightof death makes hard,
falls not the axe upon thehumbled neck
but first begs pardon.
Will you sterner be than he
that dies and lives by bloodydrops?
I would not be thy executioner.
I fly thee, for I would notinjure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murderin mine eye.
'Tis pretty, sure, and veryprobable,
that eyes, that are the frail'stand softest things
who shut their coward gates onatomies
should be call'd tyrants,butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with allmy heart,
and if mine eyes can wound, nowlet them kill thee.
Counterfeit to swoon.
Why now, fall down.
Or if thou canst not, O, forshame, for shame.
Lie not to say mine eyes aremurderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hathmade in thee.
No, I am sure,
there is no force in eyes thatcan do hurt.
O dear Phebe,
if ever as that ever may be near
you meet in some fresh cheek thepower of fancy,
then shall you know the woundsinvisible
that love's keen arrows make.
But till that time, come notthou near me,
and when that time comes,
afflict me with thy mocks.
Pity me not,
as till that time, I shall notpity thee.
And why, I pray you?
Who might be your mother
that you insult, exult-- and allat once--
over the wretched?
What though you have no beauty--
as, by my life, I see no more inyou
than without candle may go darkto bed--
must you be therefore proud andpitiless?
Why, what means this?
Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you
than in the ordinary of nature'ssale-work.
'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle myeyes too.
No, faith, proud mistress, hopenot after it.
'Tis not your inky brows, yourblack silk hair,
your bugle eyeballs, nor yourcheek of cream
that can entame my spirits toyour worship.
You foolish shepherd,
why do you follow her
like foggy south puffing withwind and rain?
You are a thousand times aproperer man than she a woman.
'Tis such fools as you
as makes the world full ofill-favor'd children:
'Tis not her glass but you thatflatters her;
and out of you, she sees herselfmore proper
than any of her lineaments canshow her.
But, mistress, know yourself.
Down on your knees and thankheaven, fasting,
for a good man's love,
for I must tell you friendly inyour ear,
sell when you can.
You are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy.
Love him.
Take his offer.
Foul is most foul being foul tobe a scoffer.
So take her to thee, shepherd.
Fare thee well.
Sweet youth, I pray you, chide ayear together.
I'd rather hear you chide thanthis man woo.
He's fallen in love with yourfoulness,
and she'll fall in love with myanger.
If it be so,
as fast as she answers thee withfrowning looks,
I'll sauce her with bitterwords.
Why look you so on me?
For no ill will I bear you.
I pray you, do not fall in lovewith me,
for I am falser than vows madein wine.
Besides, I like you not.
I-If you will know my house,
'tis at the tuft of olives herehard by.
Sister, will you go?
Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister.
Shepherdess, look on him better,
and be not proud.
Though all the world could see,
none could be so abused in sightas he.
Come, to our flock.
Dead shepherd, now I find thysaw of might,
"Whoever loved that loved not atfirst sight?"
Sweet Phebe--
Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius?
Sweet Phebe, pity me.
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentleSilvius.
Wherever sorrow is, relief wouldbe.
If you do sorrow at my grief inlove,
then by giving love,
your sorrow and my grief wereboth extermined.
Thou hast my love.
Is not that neighborly?
I would have you.
Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that Ihated thee,
and yet it is not that I bearthee love,
but since that thou canst talkof love so well,
thy company, which erst wasirksome to me,
I will endure,
and I'll employ thee too.
But do not look for furtherrecompense
than thine own gladness thatthou art employ'd.
So holy and so perfect is mylove
and I in such a poverty of grace
that I shall think it a mostplenteous crop
to glean the broken ears
after the man that the mainharvest reaps.
Loose now and then a scatter'dsmile,
and that I'll live upon.
Know'st now the youth that spoketo me erewhile?
Not very well, but I have methim oft,
and he hath bought the cottageand the bounds
that the old carlot once wasmaster of.
Think not I love him, though Iask for him.
'Tis but a peevish boy.
Yet he talks well.
But what care I for words?
Yet words do well when he thatspeaks them
pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth-- not verypretty--
but, sure, he's proud,
and yet his pride becomes him.
He'll make a proper man.
The best thing in him is hiscomplexion,
and faster than his tongue didmake offence,
his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall.
Yet for his years, he's tall.
His leg is but so-so, and yet'tis well.
There was a pretty redness inhis lip,
a little riper and more lustyred than that mix'd in hischeek.
'Twas just the difference
betwixt the constant red andmingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius,
had they mark'd him in parcelsas I did,
would have gone near to fall inlove with him,
but, for my part, I love him notnor hate him not,
and yet I have more cause tohate him than to love him.
For what had he to do to chideat me?
He said mine eyes were black andmy hair black
and, now I am remember'd,scorn'd at me.
I marvel why I answer'd notagain.
But that's all one.
Omittance is no quittance.
I'll write to him a verytaunting letter,
and thou shalt bear it.
Wilt thou, Silvius?
Phebe, with all my heart.
I'll write it straight.
Go with me, Silvius.
I prithee, pretty youth,
let me be better acquainted withthee.
They say you are a melancholyfellow.
I am so.
I do love it better thanlaughing.
Those that are in extremity ofeither are abominable fellows
and betray themselves to everymodern censure
worse than drunkards.
Why, 'tis good to be sad and saynothing.
Why then, 'tis good to be apost.
I have neither the scholar'smelancholy,
which is emulation;
nor the musician's, which isfantastical;
nor the courtier's, which isproud;
nor the soldier's, which isambitious;
nor the lawyer's, which ispolitic;
nor the lady's, which is nice;
nor the lover's, which is allthese;
but it is a melancholy of mineown,
compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects,
and, indeed, the sundrycontemplation of my travels,
in which my often rumination
wraps me in a most humoroussadness.
A traveller.
By my faith, you have greatreason to be sad.
I fear you have sold your ownlands
to see other men's.
Then, to have seen much and tohave nothing,
is to have rich eyes and poorhands.
Yes, I have gained myexperience.
And your experience makes yousad.
I'd rather have a fool to makeme merry
than experience to make me sad--
and to travel for it too--
Good day and happiness, dearRosalind.
Nay, then, God by you, and youtalk in blank verse.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller.
Look you, lisp and wear strangesuits,
disable all the benefits of yourown country,
be out of love with yournativity,
and almost chide God for makingyou
that countenance you are,
or I will scarce think you haveswam in a gondola.
How now, Orlando.
Where have you been all thiswhile?
You, a lover,
and you serve me such anothertrick,
never come in my sight more.
My fair Rosalind,
I come within an hour of mypromise.
Break an hour's promise in love?
He that will divide a minuteinto a thousand parts
and break but a part
of the thousandth part of aminute in the affairs of love,
it may be said of him
that Cupid hath clapped him o'erthe shoulder,
but I'll warrant himheart-whole.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
Nay, and you be so tardy,
come no more in my sight.
I had as lief be wooed of asnail.
Of a snail?
Ay, of a snail,
for though he comes slowly,
he carries his house on hishead--
a better jointure, I think,
than you make a woman.
Besides, he carries his destinywith him.
What's that?
Why, horns, which such as you
are fain to be beholding to yourwives for.
Virtue is no horn maker,
and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And I am your Rosalind.
It pleases him to call you so.
He hath a Rosalind of a betterleer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me,
for now I am in a holiday humorand like enough to consent.
What would you say to me now,
an I were your very, veryRosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better to speakfirst,
and when you were gravelled forlack of matter,
then you might take occasion tokiss.
Very good orators, when they areout, they spit,
and for lovers lacking-- Godwarn us--matter,
the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty,and there begins new matter.
What, of my suit?
Not out of your apparel, and yetout of your suit.
Am not I your Rosalind?
I take some joy to say you are,
because I would be talking ofher.
Well then, in her person,
I say I will not have you.
Then, in mine own person, I die.
No, faith, die by attorney.
The poor world is almost 6,000years old,
and in all that time,
there was not any man died inhis own person,
videlicet, in a love-cause.
Troilus had his brains dashedout with a Grecian club,
although he did what he could todie before,
and he is one of the verypatterns of love.
Leander, he would have lived formany a fair year,
though Hero had turned nun,
had it not been for a hotmidsummer night,
for, good youth, he went butforth
to wash him in the Hellespont
and there being taken of a crampwas drowned,
and the foolish chronicles ofthat age
did find it "Hero of Sestos."
But these are all lies.
Men have died from time to time,
and worms have eaten them, butnot for love.
I would not have my rightRosalind of this mind,
for, I protest, her frown mightkill me.
By this hand, it will not kill afly.
But come,
now I will be your Rosalind
in a more coming-on disposition,
and ask me what you will.
I will grant it.
Then love me, Rosalind.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays andSaturdays and all.
And wilt thou have me?
Aye, and 20 such.
What sayest thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why, can one desire too much ofa good thing?
Come, sister, you must be thepriest and marry us.
Give me your hand, Orlando.
Well, sister, what do you say?
Pray thee, marry us.
Well, I cannot say the words.
You must begin, "Will you,Orlando"--
Go to.
Will you, Orlando, have to wifethis Rosalind?
I will.
Aye, but when?
Why now; as fast as she canmarry us.
Why, then, you must say,
"'I take thee, Rosalind, forwife."
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
I might ask you for yourcommission,
but I do take thee, Orlando, formy husband.
Oh.
There's a girl goes before thepriest,
and certainly a woman's thoughtruns before her actions.
So do all thoughts.
They are winged.
How long would you have herafter you have possessed her?
Forever and a day.
Say the "day" without the"ever."
No, no,
Orlando, men are April when theywoo,
December when they wed.
Maids are May when they aremaids,
but the sky changes when theyare wives.
I will be more jealous of thee
than a Barbary cock-pigeon overhis hen,
more clamorous than a parrotagainst rain,
more new-fangled than an ape,
more giddy in my desires than amonkey.
I will weep for nothing, likeDiana in the fountain,
and I will do that when you aredisposed to be merry.
I will laugh like a hyena,
and that when you are inclinedto sleep.
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
O, but she is wise.
Else she would not have the witto do this.
The wiser, the waywarder.
Make the doors upon a woman'swit,
and it will out at the casement.
Shut that, 'twill out throughthe keyhole.
Stop that,
'twill fly with the smoke out ofthe chimney.
For these two hours, Rosalind, Iwill leave thee.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lackthee two hours.
I must attend the duke atdinner.
By two o'clock, I will be withthee again.
Well...
go your ways, go your ways.
I knew what you would prove.
My friends told me as such, andI-I-I thought no less:
'Twas that flattering tongue ofyours won me.
Well, 'tis but one cast off, andso, come, death!
Two o'clock is your hour?
Aye, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and so God mend me,
and by all pretty oaths that arenot dangerous,
if you break one jot of yourpromise
or come one minute behind yourhour,
I will think you the mostpathetical break-promise,
the most hollow lover,
and the most unworthy of her youthat call Rosalind
that may be chosen out of thegross band of the unfaithful,
and so, beware my censure,
and keep your promise.
With no less religion
than if thou wert indeed myRosalind.
So, adieu.
Well, Time is the old justicethat examines all suchoffenders,
and let Time try. Adieu.
You have simply misused our sexin your love-prate.
We must have your doublet andhose
plucked over your head
to show the world what the birdhath done to her own nest.
O coz, coz, coz,
my pretty little coz,
if thou didst know
how many fathom deep I am inlove.
But it cannot be sounded.
My affection hath an unknownbottom,
like the bay of Portugal.
Or rather, bottomless,
for as fast as you pouraffection in,
it runs out.
No, that same wicked bastard ofVenus
that was begot of thought,
conceived of spleen, and born ofmadness,
that blind rascally boy
that abuses every one's eyesbecause his own are out,
let him be judge how deep I amin love.
Oh...
I tell thee, Aliena,
I cannot be out of the sight ofOrlando.
I'll go find a shadow and sighuntil he come.
And I'll sleep.
Which is he that killed thedeer?
Sir, it was I.
Let's present him to the duke,like a Roman conqueror,
and it would do well
to set the deer's horns upon hishead
for a branch of victory.
Have you no song, forester, forthis purpose?
Yes, sir.
Sing it!
'Tis no matter how it be in tune
so it make noise enough.
What shall he have that kill'dthe deer?
His leather skin and horns towear.
Then sing him home.
Take thou no scorn to wear thehorn;
It was a crest ere thou wastborn.
Thy father's father wore it,
and thy father bore it.
The horn, the horn, the lustyhorn
is not a thing to laugh toscorn.
How say you now?
Is it not past two o'clock?
And here much Orlando.
I warrant you,
with pure love and with troubledbrain,
he hath ta'en his bow and arrowsand is gone forth to sleep.
My errand is to you, fair youth;
My gentle Phebe did bid me giveyou this.
I know not the contents, but, asI guess
by the stern brow and waspishaction
that she did use as she waswriting of it,
it bears an angry tenor.
pardon me:
I am but as a guiltlessmessenger.
Patience herself would startleat this letter
and play the swaggerer.
Bear this, bear all.
She says I am not fair, that Ilack manners.
She calls me proud and that shecould not love me
were man as rare as phoenix.
'Od's my will.
Her love is not the hare that Ido hunt.
Why writes she this to me?
Well, shepherd, well,
this is a letter of your owndevice.
No, I protest, I know not thecontents.
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool
and turn'd into the extremity oflove.
I saw her hand.
She has a leathern hand,
a freestone-color'd hand.
I verily did think that her oldgloves were on,
but 'twas her hands.
She has a huswife's hand; but'tis no matter.
I say she never did invent thisletter.
this is a man's invention andhis hand.
Sure, it is hers.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and acruel style.
A style for challengers.
Why, she defies me as Turk toChristian.
Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heardit yet,
yet heard too much of Phebe'scruelty.
She Phebes me.
Mark how the tyrant writes.
"Art thou god to shepherdturn'd,
that a maiden's heart hathburn'd?"
Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
"Why, thy godhead laid apart,
warr'st thou with a woman'sheart?"
Did you ever hear such railing?
"Whiles the eye of man did woome,
"that could do no vengeance tome.
"Whiles you chid me, I did love.
"How then might your prayersmove?
"He that brings this love tothee
"little knows this love in me,
"and by him, seal up thy mind
"whether that thy youth and kind
"will the faithful offer take ofme
"and all that I can make,
"or else by him, my love deny,
and then I'll study how to die."
Call you this chiding?
Alas, poor shepherd.
Do you pity him?
No, he deserves no pity.
Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make of thee aninstrument
and play false strains uponthee?
Not to be endured.
Well, go thy ways to her,
for I see love hath made thee atame snake,
and say this to her.
If she love me, I charge her tolove thee.
If she will not, I will neverhave her
unless thou entreat for her.
If you be a true lover, hence,
and not a word,
for here comes more company.
Good morrow, fair ones.
Pray you, if you know,
where in the purlieus of thisforest
stands a sheep-cote fenced aboutwith olive trees?
West of this place, down in theneighbour bottom.
A rank of osiers by themurmuring stream
left on your right hand bringsyou to the place.
But at this hour the house dothkeep itself.
There is none within.
If that an eye may profit by atongue,
then should I know you bydescription.
Such garments and such years--
"The boy is fair, of femalefavor,
"and bestows himself like a ripesister;
the woman low and browner thanher brother."
Are not you the owner of thehouse I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being ask'd, tosay we are.
Orlando doth commend him to youboth,
and to that youth he calls hisRosalind
he sends this bloody napkin.
Are you he?
I am.
What must we understand by this?
Some of my shame.
If you will know of me what manI am
and how and where and why thishandkercher was stain'd.
I pray you, tell it.
When last the young Orlandoparted from you,
he left a promise to returnagain within an hour,
and pacing through the forest,
chewing the food of sweet andbitter fancy,
lo, what befell.
He threw his eye aside,
and mark what object did presentitself.
Under an oak whose boughs weremoss'd with age
and high top bald with dryantiquity,
A wretched ragged man o'ergrownwith hair
lay sleeping on his back.
About his neck,
a green and gilded snake hadwreathed itself
who with her head nimble inthreats
approach'd the opening of hismouth,
but suddenly, seeing Orlando, itunlink'd itself
and with indented glides didslip away into a bush,
under which bush's shade,
a lioness with udders all drawndry lay couching,
head on ground with catlikewatch,
when that the sleeping manshould stir,
for 'tis the royal dispositionof that beast
to prey on nothing that dothseem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approachthe man
and found it was his brother,his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak ofthat same brother,
and he did render him the mostunnatural amongst men.
And well he might so do,
for well I know he wasunnatural.
But to Orlando, did he leave himthere,
food to the suck'd and hungrylioness?
Twice did he turn his back andpurposed so,
but kindness, nobler ever thanrevenge,
and nature, stronger than hisjust occasion,
made him give battle to thelioness,
who quickly fell before him
in which hurtling from miserableslumber,
I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Wast you he rescued?
Was't you that did so oftcontrive to kill him?
'Twas I, but 'tis not I.
I do not shame to tell you whatI was,
since my conversion so sweetlytastes,
being the thing I am.
But, for the bloody napkin?
By and by.
When from the first and last,betwixt us two,
tears our recountments had mostkindly bathed
as how I came into that desertplace--
in brief, he led me to thegentle duke,
who gave me fresh array andentertainment,
committing me unto my brother'slove,
who led me instantly unto hiscave,
there stripp'd himself,
and here, upon his arm,
the lioness had torn some fleshaway,
which all this while had bled,
and now he fainted
and cried, in fainting, uponRosalind.
Brief, I recover'd him, bound uphis wound,
and, after some small space,being strong at heart,
he sent me hither, stranger as Iam,
to tell this story
that you might excuse his brokenpromise
and to give this napkin dyed inhis blood
unto that shepherd youth that hein sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why, how now, Ganymede,
sweet Ganymede.
Many will swoon when they dolook on blood.
There is more in it.
Cousin Ganymede.
Look, he recovers.
Oh.
Would I were at home.
We'll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him bythe arm?
Be of good cheer.
Wert you a man, you lack a man'sheart.
I do so, I confess it.
Ah, ah, ha, ha, sirrah,
a body would think this was wellcounterfeited.
I pray you, tell your brotherhow well I counterfeited.
Ah!
This was not a counterfeit.
There is too great testimony inyour complexion
that it was a passion ofearnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart andcounterfeit to be a man.
Oh.
So I do,
but, in faith,
I should have been a woman byright.
Come, you look paler and paler.
I pray you, draw homeward.
Good sir, go with us.
Will you go?
We shall find a time, Audrey.
Patience, gentle Audrey.
Faith, the priest was goodenough,
for all the old gentleman'ssaying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver,Audrey,
a most vile Martext.
But, Audrey, there is a youthhere in the forest
lays claim to you.
Aye, I know who 'tis.
He hath no interest in me in theworld.
Here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me tosee a clown.
By my troth, we that have goodwits
have much to answer for.
We shall be flouting; we cannothold.
Good even, Audrey.
God ye good even, William.
And good even to you, sir.
Good even, gentle friend.
Cover thy head, cover thy head.
Nay, prithee, be covered.
How old are you, friend?
F...
Five and twenty, sir.
A ripe age.
Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name.
Wast born i' the forest here?
Ay, sir, I thank God.
"Thank God"--a good answer.
Art rich?
Faith, sir, so-so.
"So-so" is good, very good, veryexcellent good,
and yet it is not.
It is but so-so.
Art thou wise?
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayest well.
You do love this maid.
I do, sir.
Give me your hand.
Art thou learned?
No, sir.
Then learn this of me.
To have is to have,
for it is a figure in rhetoricthat drink,
being poured out of a cup into aglass,
by filling the one doth emptythe other,
for all your writers do consentthat ipse is he.
Now, you are not ipse.
I am he.
Which he, sir?
He, sir, that must marry thiswoman.
Therefore, you clown, abandon--
which is in the vulgar "leave"--
the society--which in theboorish is "company"--
of this female-- which in thecommon is "woman"--
which together is
abandon the society of thisfemale,
or, clown, thou perishest;
or, to thy better understanding,diest;
or, to wit, I kill thee;
make thee away,
translate thy life into death,
thy liberty into bondage.
I will deal in poison with theeor in bastinado or in steel.
I will bandy with thee infaction.
I will o'errun thee with policy.
I will kill you a hundred andfifty ways!
Therefore, tremble and depart!
Do, good William.
God rest you merry, sir.
Ah! Oh, Ee-yah!
Our master and mistress seeksyou.
Come, away, away.
Trip, Audrey. Trip, Audrey.
I attend. I attend.
Is't possible that on so littleacquaintance
you should like her?
That but seeing, you should loveher?
And loving, woo?
And wooing, she should grant?
And will you persever to enjoyher?
Neither call the giddiness of itin question,
nor the poverty of her, thesmall acquaintance,
nor my sudden wooing, nor hersudden consenting;
but say with me, I love Aliena.
Say with her that she loves me.
Consent to it both that we mayenjoy each other.
It shall be to your good,
for my father's house and allthe revenue
that was old Sir Rowland's willI bestow upon you
and here live and die ashepherd.
You have my consent.
Let your wedding be tomorrow.
Thither will I invite the dukeand all's contented followers.
Go you, and prepare Aliena,
for look you,
here comes my Rosalind.
God save you, brother.
And you, fair sister.
O, my dear Orlando,
how it grieves me to see theewear thy heart in a scarf.
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had beenwounded
with the claws of a lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyesof a lady.
Did your brother tell you how Icounterfeited to swoon
when he showed me yourhandkerchief?
Aye, and greater wonders thanthat.
O, I know where you are.
Nay, 'tis true.
There was never anything sosudden
as the fight of two rams
or Caesar's thrasonical brag of"I came, saw, and overcame,"
for your brother and my sisterno sooner met but they looked,
no sooner looked but they loved,
no sooner loved but they sighed,
no sooner sighed but they askedone another the reason,
no sooner knew the reason butthey sought the remedy;
and in these degrees
have they made a pair of stairsto marriage
which they will climbincontinent
or else be incontinent beforemarriage.
They are in the very wrath oflove,
and they will together.
Clubs cannot part them.
They shall be married tomorrow,
and I will bid the duke to thenuptial,
but, O, how bitter a thing it is
to look into happiness throughanother man's eyes.
By so much the more shall Itomorrow
be at the height ofheart-heaviness
by how much I shall think mybrother happy
in having what he wishes for.
Why then, tomorrow I cannotserve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer bythinking.
I will weary you then no longerwith idle talking.
Know of me then, I can dostrange things.
I have, since I was three yearold,
conversed with a magician
most profound in his art and yetnot damnable.
If you do love Rosalind
so near the heart as yourgesture cries it out,
when your brother marriesAliena,
shall you marry her.
I know into what straits offortune she is driven,
and it is not impossible to me,
if it appear not inconvenient toyou,
to set her before your eyestomorrow,
human as she is and without anydanger.
Speakest thou in sober meanings?
By my life, I do, which I tenderdearly,
although I say I am a magician.
Therefore, put you in your bestarray,
and bid your friends,
for if you will be marriedtomorrow, you shall,
and to Rosalind, if you will.
Here comes a lover of mine and alover of hers.
Youth, you have done me muchungentleness
to show the letter that I writto you.
I care not if I have.
It is my study to seemdespiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by afaithful shepherd.
Look on him; love him.
He worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youthwhat 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighsand tears,
and so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
all made of passion,
and all made of wishes,
all adoration, duty, andobservance,
all humbleness,
all patience and impatience,
all purity,
all trial,
all obedience;
and so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you meto love you?
Who do you speak to, "Why blameyou me to love you?"
To her that is not here nor dothnot hear.
I pray you, no more of this.
It is like the howling of Irishwolves
against the moon.
I will help you, if I can.
I would love you, if I could.
Tomorrow, meet me all together.
I will marry you, if ever Imarry woman,
and I'll be married tomorrow.
I will satisfy you, if ever Isatisfied man,
and you shall be marriedtomorrow.
I will content you,
if what pleases you contentsyou,
and you shall be marriedtomorrow.
As you love Rosalind, meet;
as you love Phebe, meet;
and as I love no woman, I'llmeet.
So fare you well.
I have left you commands.
I'll not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Tomorrow is the joyful day,Audrey.
Tomorrow will we be married.
I do desire it with all myheart,
and I hope it is no dishonestdesire
to desire to be a woman of theworld.
Here comes two of the banishedduke's pages.
Well met, honest gentleman.
By my troth, well met.
Come, sit, sit, in a song.
We are for you; sit i' themiddle.
It was a lover and his lass--
with a hey and a ho and a heynonino
and a hey noni nonino--
that o'er the green corn fieldsdid pass
in springtime, in springtime, inspringtime,
the only pretty ring time,
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Between the acres of the rye--
with a hey and a ho and a heynonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
these pretty country folk wouldlie
in springtime, in springtime, inspringtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
This carol they began thathour--
with a hey and a ho and a heynonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
how that a life was but a flower
in springtime, in springtime, inspringtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
And therefore take the presenttime--
with a hey and a ho and a heynonino,
and a hey noni nonino--
for love is crowned with theprime
in springtime, in springtime, inspringtime,
the only pretty ring time
when birds do sing
hey ding a ding a ding,
hey ding a ding a ding.
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Truly, young gentlemen,
though there was no great matterin the ditty,
yet the note was very untunable.
You are deceived, sir.
We kept time, lost not our time.
By my troth, yes,
I count it but time lost to hearsuch a foolish song.
God by you, and God mend yourvoices.
Come, Audrey.
Dost thou believe, Orlando,
that the boy can do all thisthat he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe andsometimes do not
as those that fear they hope andknow they fear.
Patience once more, whiles ourcompact is urged.
You say, if I bring in yourRosalind,
you will bestow her on Orlandohere?
That would I, had I kingdoms togive with her.
You say you will have her when Ibring her?
That would I, were I of allkingdoms king.
You say, you'll marry me, if Ibe willing?
That will I should I die thehour after.
But if you do refuse to marryme,
you will give yourself to thismost faithful shepherd?
So is the bargain.
You say you'll have Phebe if shewill?
Though to have her and deathwere both one thing.
I have promised to make all thismatter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, togive your daughter;
You yours, Orlando, to receivehis daughter.
Keep your word, Phebe, to marryme
or else, refusing me, to wedthis shepherd.
Keep your word, Silvius,
to marry her if she do refuseme.
And from hence I go to makethese doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherdboy
some lively touches of mydaughter's favor.
My lord, the first time that Iever saw him
methought he was a brother toyour daughter.
There is, sure, another floodtoward,
and these couples are coming tothe ark.
Here comes a pair of verystrange beasts
which in all tongues are calledfools.
Salutation and greeting to youall!
Good my lord, bid him welcome.
This is the motley-mindedgentleman
I have so often met in theforest.
He hath been a courtier, heswears.
If any man doubt that, let himput me to my purgation.
I have trod a measure.
I have flattered a lady.
I have been politic with myfriend,
smooth with mine enemy.
I have undone three tailors.
I have had four quarrels andlike to have fought one.
And how was that ta'en up?
Faith, we met and found ourquarrel
was upon the seventh cause.
How seventh cause?
Good my lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God 'ild you, sir.
I desire you of the like.
I press in here, sir,
amongst the rest of the countrycopulatives,
to swear and to forswear
according as marriage binds andblood breaks,
a poor virgin, sir,
an ill-favored thing, sir, butmine own;
a poor humor of mine, sir,
to take that that no man elsewill.
Rich honesty dwells like amiser, sir,
in a poor house--
as your pearl in your fouloyster.
Faith, he is very swift andsententious.
But, for the seventh cause--
how did you find the quarrel onthe seventh cause?
Upon a lie seven times removed--
bear your body more seeming,Audrey--
as thus, sir:
I did dislike the cut of acertain courtier's beard.
He sent me word
if I said his beard was not cutwell,
he was in the mind it was.
This is called the RetortCourteous.
If I sent him word again "It wasnot well cut,"
he would send me word, he cut itto please himself.
This is called the Quip Modest.
If again "It was not well cut,"he disabled my judgment.
This is called the ReplyChurlish.
If again "It was not well cut,"
he would answer I spake nottrue.
This is called the ReproofValiant.
If again "It was not well cut,"he would say I lie.
This is called the CounterchequeQuarrelsome,
and so to the Lie Circumstantialand the Lie Direct.
And how oft did you say hisbeard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than theLie Circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the LieDirect,
and so we measured swords andparted.
Is not this a rare fellow, mylord?
He's as good at anything and yeta fool.
He uses his folly like astalking-horse
and under the presentation ofthat,
he shoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heaven
when earthly things made evenatone together.
Good duke, receive thy daughter.
Hymen from heaven brought her,
yea, brought her hither
that thou mightst join her handwith his
whose heart within his bosom is.
To you, I give myself, for I amyours.
To you I give myself, for I amyours.
If there be truth in sight, youare my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, youare my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
why then, my love, adieu.
I'll have no father if you benot he.
I'll have no husband if you benot he...
nor ne'er wed woman if you benot she.
Peace, ho.
I bar confusion.
'Tis I must make conclusion
of these most strange events.
Here's eight that must takehands
to join in Hymen's bands
if truth holds true contents.
You and you no cross shall part.
You and you are heart in heart.
You to his love must accord
or have a woman to your lord.
You and you are sure together
as the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
feed yourselves with questioning
that reason wonder may diminish
how thus we met and these thingsfinish.
Wedding is great Juno's crown,
O blessed bond of board and bed.
'Tis Hymen peoples every town.
High wedlock then be honored.
Honor, high honor, and renown
to Hymen, god of every town.
O my dear niece, welcome thouart to me.
Even daughter, welcome in noless degree.
I will not eat my word now thouart mine.
Thy faith my fancy to thee dothcombine.
Let me have audience for a wordor two.
I am the second son of old SirRowland
that bring these tidings to thisfair assembly.
Duke Frederick,
hearing how that every day
men of great worth resorted tothis forest,
address'd a mighty power,
which were on foot, in his ownconduct,
purposely to take his brotherhere
and put him to the sword,
and to the skirts of this wildwood, he came,
where, meeting with an oldreligious man,
after some question with him
was converted
both from his enterprise
and from the world,
his crown bequeathing to hisbanish'd brother
and all their lands restored tothem again
that were with him exiled.
This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome, young man.
Thou offer'st fairly to thybrothers' wedding.
To the one his lands withheld
and to the other a land itselfat large,
a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest, let us dothose ends
which here were well begun andwell begot:
and after, every of this happynumber
that have endured shrewd daysand nights with us
shall share the good of ourreturned fortune
according to the measure oftheir states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'ndignity
and fall into our rusticrevelry.
Play, music!
And you, brides and bridegroomsall,
with measure heap'd in joy,
to the measures fall.
Sir, by your patience.
If I heard you rightly, the dukehath put on a religious life
and thrown into neglect thepompous court?
He hath.
To him will I.
Out of these convertites,
there is much matter to be heardand learn'd.
You to your former honor Ibequeath.
Your patience and your virtuewell deserves it.
You to a love that your truefaith doth merit.
You to your land and love andgreat allies.
You to a long and well-deservedbed.
And you to wrangling,
for thy loving voyage is but fortwo months victuall'd.
So, to your pleasures.
I am for other than for dancingmeasures.
Stay, Jaques, stay.
To see no pastime I, what youwill have,
I'll stay to know at yourabandon'd cave.
Proceed, proceed.
We will begin these rites as wedo trust they'll end,
in true delights.
It is not the fashion to see thelady the epilogue,
but it is no more unhandsomethan to see the lord theprologue.
If it be true that good wineneeds no bush,
'tis true that a good play needsno epilogue.
Yet to good wine, they do usegood bushes,
and a good play proves thebetter
by the help of good epilogue.
What a case am I in then that amneither a good epilogue
nor cannot insinuate with you inthe behalf of a good play.
I am not furnished like abeggar.
Therefore, to beg will notbecome me.
My way is to conjure you,
and I'll begin with the women.
I charge you, O women, for thelove you bear to men,
to like as much of this play asplease you;
and I charge you, O men, for thelove you bear to women--
as I perceive by your simperingnone of you hates them--
that between you and the women,the play may please.
If I were a woman,
I would kiss as many of you ashad beards that pleased me,
complexions that liked me, andbreaths that I defied not;
and as many of you as have goodbeards or good faces or sweetbreaths
will, for my kind offer, when Imake curtsy,
bid me farewell.